SWT Pitch: Include additional issue metadata in event stream (#3396)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/testing/nnnn-add-issue-metadata-event-stream.md

## Motivation

Tools such as Xcode and VS Code can consume the "issue recorded" event from
Swift Testing's JSON event stream and use that to present test failure details
to the user. However, there isn't enough structured information present to
distinguish between different kinds of issues.

For example, the following test fail due to different kinds of issues:

```swift
@Test func `Issue A`() async throws {
    Issue.record("Issue A")
}
@Test func `Issue B`() async throws {
    struct ErrorB: Error {}
    throw ErrorB()
}
```

The event stream will contain similar issue metadata for both, differing only in
their `sourceLocation`:

```json
"issue": {
  "isFailure": true,
  "isKnown": false,
  "severity": "error",
  "sourceLocation": { ... }
}
```

With the proposed solution, tools can access additional metadata to distinguish
between issue types and provide richer context for test failures to their end
users.

## Proposed solution

We propose adding new fields to the issue event type.

## Detailed design

These changes are proposed for event stream schema version `6.5`.

These new fields provide structured information about issues that previously

> weren't available in a machine-readable form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weren't available in a machine-readable form:
```
to match the colon (`:`) at the end of the paragraph after this bulleted list

  Testing will fill this if a confirmation was confirmed more/fewer times than
  expected.

- **Time limit:** the test exceeded a time limit. The unit is seconds, which
  follows the precedent set in an
  [earlier event stream proposal](./0019-include-tags-bugs-and-timeline-in-event-stream.md).

- **Known issue comment:** if a known issue [that was expected but did not occur
  at test time][resolve-a-known-issue] has a human-readable comment, it is
  included as the value of the existing `"isKnown"` field.

[resolve-a-known-issue]:
  https://developer.apple.com/documentation/Testing/known-issues#Resolve-a-known-issue

- **Expression:** the expression associated with the issue. This is primarily
  used to capture the body of a failed expectation. However, it can also
  describe a confirmation that was miscounted.

The following field is added for all events:

- **Comments:** a common event field that stores user provided comments.

  For issues, users can supply comments when recording issues or creating
  expectations, e.g. `Issue.record("A comment")` or
  `#expect(a == b, "A comment")`.

### Schema changes

> We propose the following changes to the [event stream JSON schema][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose the following changes to the [event stream JSON schema][]:
```

[event stream JSON schema]:
  https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-testing/blob/main/Documentation/ABI/JSON.md

- `comment` and `time` are currently type aliases which unify references to
  their respective concepts throughout the schema. In the future, we could
  easily change the definition of these types to more complex nested structures.

- `numeric-range` is limited, for simplicity, to representing inclusive bounds.

<!-- TODO: we might need to support exclusive bounds since the confirmation
range is a RangeExpression which could be a Range and not just a ClosedRange-->

```diff
+<comment> ::= <string> ; human-readable, developer-supplied text

+<time> ::= <number> ; a timestamp or duration expressed in (floating-point) seconds

+<numeric-range> ::= {
+  ["min": <number>,] ; lower-bound, inclusive
+  ["max": <number>] ; upper-bound, inclusive, must be ≥ min (if present)
+}
```

> ```diff

Reviewer: There's a break between these two `diff` code blocks here, is that intentional? This seems like it could be one contiguous "diff" block, unless you meant to include some commentary between them

### Schema changes

We propose the following changes to the [event stream JSON schema][].

[event stream JSON schema]:
  https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-testing/blob/main/Documentation/ABI/JSON.md

- `comment` and `time` are currently type aliases which unify references to
  their respective concepts throughout the schema. In the future, we could
  easily change the definition of these types to more complex nested structures.

- `numeric-range` is limited, for simplicity, to representing inclusive bounds.

<!-- TODO: we might need to support exclusive bounds since the confirmation
range is a RangeExpression which could be a Range and not just a ClosedRange-->

```diff
+<comment> ::= <string> ; human-readable, developer-supplied text

+<time> ::= <number> ; a timestamp or duration expressed in (floating-point) seconds

+<numeric-range> ::= {
+  ["min": <number>,] ; lower-bound, inclusive
+  ["max": <number>] ; upper-bound, inclusive, must be ≥ min (if present)
+}
```

```diff
<event> ::= {
...
+  ["comments": <array:comment>,] ; comments provided by the test author
}

<issue> ::= {
 ...
+  ["expression": <expression>,] ; an expression associated with the issue

> +  ["error": <error>,] ; the associated error or exception if produced by a language that supports them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+  ["error": <error>,] ; the associated error or exception, if any
```

I think it's implied that if a language doesn't have error handling, it won't populate the error field.

+  ["miscount": <miscount>,] ; an associated miscount (too high or too low)

> +  ["exceededTimeLimit": <time>,] ; the time limit, in seconds, for the test that was exceeded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+  ["exceededTimeLimit": <time>,] ; the time limit, in seconds, that was exceeded
```

-  "isKnown": <bool>,
+  ["isKnown": <bool> | <comment>] ; whether the issue is known (optionally, the comment associated with the known issue)
}

+<error> ::= {
+  ["code": <number>,]
+  ["domain": <string>,]
+  ["description": <string>,]
+  ["type": <type-info>]
+}

+<miscount> ::= {
+  "actual": <number>,
+  "expected": <number> ; when the confirmation specifies a single count
+            | <numeric-range> ; when the confirmation specifies a range
+}

+<expression> ::= {
+  "sourceCode": <string>, ; unmodified source code
+  ["value": <expression-value>,] ; the expression's value if available
+  ["type": <type-info>,] ; type for the runtime value
+  ["children": <array:expression>] ; subexpressions, if present
+}
+
+<expression-value> ::= <string> ; a description of the value
+                       | <number> ; the value, if numeric

```

`type-info` will support types from all languages, not just Swift, so only
applicable fields will be present. For example, C doesn't have fully qualified

> names nor mangle names.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
names nor, in most implementations, mangled names.
```

```diff
+<type-info> ::= {
+  ["fullyQualifiedName": <string>,]  ; e.g. "Swift.Bool", "std::string"
+  ["unqualifiedName": <string>,]   ; e.g. "Bool", "string"

> +  ["mangledName": <string>,] ; e.g. "Sb", "NSt3__112basic_string..." not necessarily Swift mangling

Reviewer 2: You're calling out "not necessarily Swift mangling" here but `"fullyQualifiedName"` is also not necessarily a fully-qualified Swift type name. Maybe move that note up near the comment about C?

Author: I think I'll just remove the note since the earlier paragraph already explains the type might not be just from Swift.

+}
```

<!-- TODO: Impl details:
- Fill in <comment> elsewhere in the JSON ABI spec
- Fill in <time> elsewhere in the JSON ABI spec

- Disambiguate the other issue kinds without any associated values: known issue not recorded, api misuse, system
-->

### Sample JSON output

<!-- TODO: after demo impl is ready -->

## Source compatibility

There are no source compatibility concerns.

## Integration with supporting tools

The definition of the `isKnown` field will change from the 6.4 schema. It will
no longer be a required boolean-valued field, and will instead be an optional
boolean-valued or string-valued field.

All other fields are purely additive to the JSON ABI.

Existing tools that integrate with Swift Testing will need to update their
integration code to read the new fields. For example, the implementation of
targeted interoperability needs to be updated to read the error from the
`EncodedIssue` type.

## Future directions

> - We'd like to add **parameterised test information,** specifically test

Reviewer 2: This is a separate proposal, not a future direction for the changes in this proposal. You don't need to discuss all possible JSON changes here. :)

Author: Ah, if this is coming soon in a separate proposal, I don't need to mention this related work then?

  function definitions and test cases with argument lists, to the event stream.
  Because test authors can provide a large number of arguments to generate many
  tests, this faces the extra challenge of ensuring the event stream remains
  performant. Therefore, this work deserves additional scrutiny in a follow-up
  proposal.

<!-- TODO: check the current status of symbolication on Linux -->

- We considered including the **issue backtrace** as an optional field. However,
  as of this proposal, there is no yet a way to symbolicate `Issue` backtrace
  addresses on Linux. Furthermore, in-process symbolication is an expensive
  operation, so the design will warrant additional care and scrutiny. Issue
  backtrace can be added in a follow-up proposal once there are solutions to
  both of these challenges.

> - We'd also like to include **exception information** in the issue event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We'd also like to include **exception information** in the `<issue>` structure.
```

Perhaps?

  Although Swift doesn't use exceptions for error handling, test code may
  interoperate with languages which do (e.g. Objective-C, Java). The `error`
  field in the issue metadata may be a good candidate to place exception
  metadata, but exceptions do not share many of the same fields (code, domain,

>   type) as errors in Swift.

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking, `code` and `domain` are not Swift-isms either, but Swift does inherit them from Objective-C and `NSError`.

Author: Good point. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
  type) as errors derived from `NSError` in Foundation.
```

I know the wording is a bit awkward, but do you feel that communicates the right intention?

## Alternatives considered

### Issue kind

We considered introducing a "kind" field to issue, which follows the existing
pattern set by event kind:

```diff
<issue> ::= {
 ...
+  "kind": <issue-kind>
}

+<issue-kind> ::= "unconditional" | "expectationFailed" | "confirmationMiscounted" | ...

<event> ::= {
  "kind": <event-kind>,
  ...
}

<event-kind> ::= "runStarted" | "testStarted" | "testCaseStarted" | ...
```

However, issue kind is primarily an implementation detail of the testing
library, and not all tools that consume test events support all the issue kinds
that the testing library emits.

Furthermore, tools can derive the same information that issue kind provides by
inspecting the issue fields. For example, presence of an `miscount` field
indicates this issue was the "confirmationMiscounted" kind.

### Backtraces

We deliberately picked issue fields that would be relevant to issues created by
other test libraries besides Swift Testing.

> For example, the `Issue` structure contains backtrace addresses which could be

Reviewer 2: I should note that the backtrace in `Issue` is not API. If we add backtraces to the JSON schema, we should consider exposing them as API in Swift too.

Author: I think I'll remove this from "Alternatives considered" and just keep it in "Future directions," since I think we should still aim to have backtraces available in the issue schema in the future. I'll add the note about backtrace not being API yet too.
